Detailed Visualization of the Great Compassionate One’s Retinue
by Dodrupchen Jikme Trinle Özer

shar du jetsün drolma kudok kar
In the East is Venerable Tārā, her body white in colour.
chak yé chok jin utpal karpo dang
Her right hand is in the mudrā of supreme generosity and holds a white Utpala flower.
yönpé nyamzhak tsé yi bumpa dzin
Her left hand rests in the mudrā of equipoise and holds a long life vase.
zhab nyi sem mé kyilmo trung gi zhuk
Her two legs are in the bodhisattva’s crossed legged posture.

lho ru gyé jé özer chen ma ni
In the South is enriching Mārīcī.
zhal chik chak nyi ser dok zhi ma tro
She has one face and two hands; her body is gold in colour, semi-wrathful.
zur zhal gyen zik yön kum yé kyang zhing
From the corner of her eyes she looks upwards. Her left leg is bent and her right stretched
out.
chak yé yizhin wang gi gyalpo dang
Her right hand holds the wish-fulfilling jewel, the king of power.
yönpé chak gi nyidé zhak pa deng
Her left hand holds aloft the sun and moon lasso.
dar dang rinpoche yi gyen gyi dzé
She is adorned with silk and jewelled ornaments.

nub tu wang dzé kurukullé ni
In the West is magnetizing Kurukullā.
zhal chik chak zhi zhab nyi kyangkum tsul
She has one face and four hands, her one leg is bent and the other outstretched.
tsawé chak nyi pemé dazhu deng
Her main two hands hold a bow and arrow of lotus flowers.
ok ma nam nyi chakkyu zhakpa nam
Her lower two hold an iron hook and a lasso.
taksham rüpé gyen druk pé trengden
She wears a tiger skirt and is adorned with the six bone ornaments and a lotus garland.

jang du pakma nor gyün lhamo ni
In the North is the Lady Vasudhārā.
zhal chik chak nyi ter bum tengdu zhuk
She has one face and two hands, and stands upon a treasure vase.
dar dang rinpoche yi gyen treng dzé
She is adorned with silk and a jewelled garland.
chak yé yizhin norbu wanggyal dang
Her right hand holds the wish-fulfilling jewel, the king of power.
yönpé gödö künjung né'u lé dzin
Her left hand holds the wish-fulfilling mongoose.
jang sal changchub sem mé chajé chen
She is bright green in colour and wears the attributes of a female bodhisattva.
kün kyang rang rang…
Their ornaments and garments are perfectly complete, each in their own respective style…etc.

This was written by Dodrupchen Künzang Shenpen.

| Translated by Han Kop, 2019.