The Lute of the Gandharvas
A Garland of Offerings of the Sixteen Vajra Goddesses
by Jigme Lingpa

I bow to Ārya Samantabhadra and the enlightened offering goddesses.

For this offering garland of the Sixteen Vajra Goddesses, “The Lute of the Gandharvas”, bless
the offerings by sprinkling them with purifying water and recite:
om hung tram hrih ah
oṃ hūṃ trāṃ hrīḥ āḥ
lhadzé dang tingédzin lé drubpé chi nang sangwé chötrin ngowo yeshe kyi dütsi la nampa döyön
gyi trinpung zémishepa kuntuzangpö chöpé namrol du gyepar gyur chik
Here are clouds of outer, inner and secret offerings, all created from divine substances and
meditation. While their essence is wisdom nectar, they appear as unending clouds of sensory
delights. May they expand and multiply, to match Samantabhadra’s vast display of offerings!
Recite three times:
nama sarva tatagaté bayo bisho mukhebé sarva takham udgaté saparana imam gagana kham soha
namaḥ sarvatathāgatebhyo viśvamukhebhyaḥ | sarvathā kham udgate spharaṇa imaṃ gaganakhaṃ svāhā
If you wish, you can recite the Offering Cloud Dhāraṇī at this point:
namo ratna trayaya | om namo bhagavaté benza sarapramardani tatagataya arhaté samyak sambuddhaya
teyata | om benzé benzé maha benzé maha tédzo benzé maha vidya benzé maha bodhichitta
benzé maha bodhi mandopasamkramana benzé sarva karma avarana bishodhana benzé soha
namo ratna-trayāya | oṃ namo bhagavate vajrasārapramardane tathāgatāyārhate samyaksaṃbuddhāya
tadyathā | oṃ vajra vajra mahāvajra mahātejavajra mahāvidyāvajra mahābodhicittavajra mahābodhimaṇḍopasaṃkramaṇavajra
sarvakarmāvaraṇaviśodhanavajra svāhā
Then, in the sweetest melody, recite the following:
pema gyepa tabü langtso chen
As fresh and flush with youth as a lotus in full bloom,
rek na dewé chok ter utpal mik
At a touch she bestows supreme bliss, her eyes like utpala petals.
zuk kyi namgyur ngompé yitrokma
As she moves with the gestures and glances of an enchantress—
dorje gekmoma yi nyé gyur chik
May the vajra goddess of beauty bring you delight!
guru sarva tathagata sapariwara benza lasyé hung pratitsa ho
guru sarva-tathāgata sapārivara vajra-lāsye hūṃ pratīccha hoḥ

si na nampar dzepé dawé kyang
Not even the moon, most beautiful sight in this world,
tanadukpé zuk kyi char mi nyé
Can come close to this vision of loveliness,
norbü doshal dzinpé yi ong ma
Ravishing as she holds out a necklace of jewels—
dorje trengwama yi nyé gyur chik
May the vajra goddess of garlands fill you with joy!
guru sarva tathagata sapariwara benza malyé tram pratitsa ho
guru sarva-tathāgata sapārivara vajra-mālye trāṃ pratīccha hoḥ

jam nyen pundariké langtso la
They’re as tender and supple as a pristine white lotus,
rek jam wangpö zhu yi trishing chen
Soft to the touch and with trailing vines of rainbow;
ké nyen gyurkhuk tong gi lulenma
Their sweet voices sing a thousand melodies—
dorje lumé tsok kyi nyé gyur chik
May all these vajra goddesses of song delight you!
guru sarva tathagata sapariwara benza girti hrih pratitsa ho
guru sarva-tathāgata sapārivara vajra-gīte hrīḥ pratīccha hoḥ

bungwa pemé tsal na yowa zhin
Agleam with bands of turquoise and gold, their hands and feet
chak zhab ser yü dubü dzepé gar
Move like honeybees swooping through a glade of flowers
miktrul tabur gyurwé yoden ma
As they dance in beauty, swirling into a magical apparition—
dorje garmé tsok kyi nyé gyur chik
May the vajra goddesses of dance all steep you in glee.
guru sarva tathagata sapariwara benza nirti ah pratitsa ho
guru sarva-tathāgata sapārivara vajra-nṛtye āḥ pratīccha hoḥ

chudruk longtsö nyöpé namgyur dé
Oozing with the vivacity of a sixteen year old,
nying la gawé yatsen chiryang ter
She thrills the heart with every kind of unimaginable joy.
drizhim pöpor tokpé minlekma
This gorgeous maiden, she offers a vase of fragrant incense—
dorje dukpöma yi nyé gyur chik
May the vajra incense goddess envelop you in delight.
guru sarva tathagata sapariwara benza dhupé hung pratitsa ho
guru sarva-tathāgata sapārivara vajra-dhupe hūṃ pratīccha hoḥ

tsang wang chimé bumö jogek kyang
Even the charms of Lord Brahma’s immortal daughters
shintu dzepé langtsö tenpa trok
Are put to shame by her soaring, youthful beauty.
udumwaré chün chang yitrokma
She holds you spellbound with her cascade of uḍumbara blossoms—
dorje metokma yi nyé gyur chik
May the vajra flower goddess gladden your heart.
guru sarva tathagata sapariwara benza pupé tram pratitsa ho
guru sarva-tathāgata sapārivara vajra-pūṣpe trāṃ pratīccha hoḥ

yi ong tanadukpé khurtsö la
Her cheeks, so fair, so lovely to behold, are tinged
litri tiklé küpé ridak mik
With circles of sindūra, her eyes like those of a gazelle,
nyidé drönmé tokpé zhinzangma
That exquisite face lit by lamps of sun and moon—
dorje nangsalma yi nyé gyur chik
May the vajra lamp goddess fire you with joy.
guru sarva tathagata sapariwara benza aloké hrih pratitsa ho
guru sarva-tathāgata sapārivara vajra-āloke hrīḥ pratīccha hoḥ

chimé bumö pal dzin min lek zuk
With her shapely figure, as heavenly as an immortal goddess,
zhal né utpalla yi dri tul zhing
The sweet scent of utpala on her breath, she diffuses
zangdruk men gyi jukpé gyepa kong
Delight with blends of the six healing ingredients—
dorje drichabma yi nyé gyur chik
May this vajra perfume goddess grant you every happiness!
guru sarva tathagata sapariwara benza gendhé ah pratitsa ho
guru sarva-tathāgata sapārivara vajra-gandhe āḥ pratīccha hoḥ

langtsö chashé dzokpé pema dang
Her beauty is like a lotus, with every shade of youthfulness,
namgyur chiryang charwé adarsha
Her expressions like a mirror, reflecting anything that can be,
pentsün drenpa tabü zukdzéma
And of these two which is greater, when so lovely is her form?
dorje melongma yi nyé gyur chik
May the vajra mirror goddess bring you only joy.
guru sarva tathagata sapariwara benza rupa om pratitsa ho
guru sarva-tathāgata sapārivara vajra-rūpe oṃ pratīccha hoḥ

tingdzin rimo khen gyi dripé zuk
Her body seems as if drawn by an artist in deep samādhi;
zhin dzé mendarawé tö chingchen
Her gorgeous face beneath its crown of mandāravā flowers,
dumpö nga lé detong drajinma
She coaxes from her drum the sounds of bliss and emptiness—
dorje ngaduma yi nyé gyur chik
May the vajra goddess with the round drum delight you!
guru sarva tathagata sapariwara benza mirtangi hrih pratitsa ho
guru sarva-tathāgata sapārivara vajra-mṛdaṅge hrīḥ pratīccha hoḥ

ratné sordub trolwé khutsur gyi
Jewelled rings on her fingers jingle
drizé bumor drenpé tambura
As she rivals even the gandharvas’ daughters,
nawé chi du drengpé yitrokma
Playing her lute to delight the ears and enthral the mind—
dorje piwangma yi nyé gyur chik
May the vajra lute goddess captivate and please you!
guru sarva tathagata sapariwara benza wini hung pratitsa ho
guru sarva-tathāgata sapārivara vajra-vīṇe hūṃ pratīccha hoḥ

gawa chudruk lung gi tar kyön né
Mounted on the winds of the sixteen joys,
tiklé chudruk né su dakpa lé
The sixteen subtle drops find their natural purity,
tongnyi chudruk lingbü drar tönpé
And in the notes of her flute sixteen kinds of emptiness are revealed—
dorje lingbuma yi nyé gyur chik
May the vajra flute goddess draw you into a rapture of delight!
guru sarva tathagata sapariwara benza wamsé tram pratitsa ho
guru sarva-tathāgata sapārivara vajra-vaṃśe trāṃ pratīccha hoḥ

da zhön pekar tabü langtsö pal
As glorious as a dazzling moon or pure white lotus,
mik gi dütsir jin dang chabchikpar
A maiden gorgeous to look upon, who all the while
nyen gyur dzangé dra drok nachungma
Plays rhythms on her clay-drum so sweet to hear—
dorje dzangama yi nyé gyur chik
May the vajra clay-drum goddess fill you with gladness!
guru sarva tathagata sapariwara benza murandzé ah pratitsa ho
guru sarva-tathāgata sapārivara vajra-muraje āḥ pratīccha hoḥ

tongnyi namkhé gyen gyur lha yi gö
The raiment of the gods that adorns the sky of emptiness,
rintang jödu mépé pentsali
Precious beyond words, the sublime pāñcālika silk
trulden sor tsé drönpé dzanamo
Is offered by this delectable lady, draped over her magical fingertips—
dorje rekjama yi nyé gyur chik
May the vajra goddess of touch charge you with joy!
guru sarva tathagata sapariwara benza saparshé tram pratitsa ho
guru sarva-tathāgata sapārivara vajra-sparśe trāṃ pratīccha hoḥ

chakmé chakpa chenpö zurmik gi
Her sidelong glances of intense desire, free of any clinging,
pawö yi la nyöpé chomkün juk
Slip in like thieves to make even warriors lose their minds.
lak naro gyé pal dzin zhalzé tok
In her hands delicious foods with a hundred flavours—
dorje romé tsok kyi nyé gyur chik
May the vajra goddess of taste offer you every satisfaction!
guru sarva tathagata sapariwara benza rasa hrih pratitsa ho
guru sarva-tathāgata sapārivara vajra-rāse hrīḥ pratīccha hoḥ

dewé dewé tarsön tongpanyi
The perfection of bliss through bliss is emptiness,
dechen chö kyi jungné ngal khurchen
And the lotus, source of great bliss, belongs to this mother-consort
detong ngang lé gyal kün kyepé yum
Who gives birth to all buddhas by means of bliss and emptiness—
chö kyi dorjema yi nyé gyur chik
May the vajra goddess of the dharmadhātu delight you!
guru sarva tathagata sapariwara benza dharmadhatu ah pratitsa ho
guru sarva-tathāgata sapārivara vajra-dharmadhāto āḥ pratīccha hoḥ

When we categorize the sixteen exquisite vajra goddesses, there are four outer beauties, four
inner beauties, five secret consorts related to body, speech, mind, qualities and activity,
and three common goddesses of the senses. Here are the mudrās that relate to each of the
sixteen:
1. The mudrās of the four outer beauties
For Vajra-Lāsyā, rest your two vajra-fists on your hips and gracefully incline your torso slightly
to the left.
For Vajra-Mālyā, move your two vajra-palms downwards, then raise them up, as if lifting up a
garland.
Vajra-Gītā is the singer, and since the singer’s attribute is a lute, the mudrā depicts the
playing of a lute, which is described below.
For Vajra-Nṛtyā, move your two vajra-fists to the crown of your head, as if performing a dance.
2. The mudrās of the four inner beauties
For Vajra-Dhupā, join the palms of the hands with the knuckles bent, making a ‘house of incense’.
For Vajra-Pūṣpā, hold your two vajra-fists together facing up, as if about to toss flowers upwards
into the air.
For Vajra-Alokā, make two vajra-fists, with your thumbs pointing upwards, as if you were holding
up two lit lamps.
For Vajra-Gandhā, the thumb and index finger of the left hand are touching, while the other
fingers are extended, pointing upwards, the hand cupped, resembling a conch shell. With the
thumb and index finger of the right hand, you make as if sprinkling perfume.
3. The mudrās of the five secret consorts
For the consort of enlightened body, Vajra-Rūpā, the left hand forms a fist, and above it, the
right hand is held at the level of the heart with the palm facing outwards, representing
a mirror.
For the consort of enlightened speech, Vajra Mṛdaṅgā, as if playing the round drum, the left
hand is held upright, with the fingers of the right hand tapping against the palm.
The mudrā of the consort of enlightened mind, Vajra-Vīṇā, resembles playing a lute. The left
hand faces upwards, with the thumb pressing the middle and ring finger, and index and little
finger extended. The right hand is held in the same position, but as if plucking the lute
strings.
For the consort of enlightened qualities, Vajra-Vaṃśā, (trāṃ), form the mudrā of playing the
flute at the level of your heart.
For the consort of enlightened activities, Vajra-Murajā, hold both your hands in front of your
heart, facing outwards, and drum with your fingers, like playing the clay drum.
4. The mudrās of the three common goddesses of the senses
For Vajra-Sparśā, touch the tips of the thumbs and middle and ring finger of each hand. The
little fingers are raised, as if presenting the cloth.
For Vajra-Rāsā, let your vajra-palms fold downwards and then, with the fingers stretched, lift
them up, as if offering food.
For Vajra-Dharmadhātu, make the dharmodaya mudrā with the two thumb tips touching, and all the
other fingers stretched out, with the tips of the ring fingers touching.
All mudrās need to be preceded by ‘the lotus mudrā’. Mantras and mudrās are performed simultaneously,
and then, with crossed arms, perform ‘the vajra finger snaps’, over the right and
left side of the chest.

And so the sixteen vajra consorts’ garland of offerings, This song of the gandharvas’ daughters
With its strains of a thousand lutes, Was given to me by the lady of speech, the goddess
Sarasvatī.

| Rigpa Translations, 2022. With the kind assistance of Khenchen Pema Sherab, Lama Bhuzin (Tenzin
Nyima) Rinpoche and Khenpo Sonam Tsewang.

Source: 'Jigs med gling pa. "rdo rje'i lha mo bcu drug gi mchod phreng dri za'i rgyud mang",
in klong chen snying thig rtsa pod. 5 Vols. Bodhnath, Kathmandu and Bodhgaya, Bihar: Shechen
Publications, 1994. BDRC W1KG13585. Vol. 2: 579–587.

Version: 1.1-20220309