Brief Prayer to the Ḍākinī
by Dodrupchen Jigme Trinle Özer

kyé mé ying kyi khandro kuntu zang
Samantabhadrī, ḍākinī of unborn basic space,
gakmé longkü zhing na wa ra hi
Vajravārāhī, residing in the unimpeded sambhogakāya realm,
gang dül trulku yeshé tsogyal ma
And Yeshe Tsogyal, nirmāṇakāya taming each according to their needs,
solwa depso chok tün ngödrup tsol
To you I pray: please bestow supreme and ordinary accomplishments!

ku sum gyalwé chi zuk la na mé
The unsurpassed embodiment of all the victorious buddhas of the three kāyas,
khandro yong kyi ming po heruka
The heruka, who is a brother to all ḍākinīs,
khyentsé özer jikmé lingpa la
Khyentse Özer Jigme Lingpa—‘Light rays of wisdom and love’,
solwa depso chok tün ngödrup tsol
To you I pray: please bestow supreme and ordinary accomplishments!

gang gi ka ter düdtsi gyatsö chü
The one to whom the essence of the oceanic nectar of his words and revelations
nam sum dépé yurwar lek drangpé
Was perfectly passed on through the channel of threefold faith,
jikmé trinlé özer pal bar la
Jigme Trinlé Özer Palbar— ‘Light rays of fearless activity blazing in splendour’,
solwa depso chok tün ngödrup tsol
To you I pray: please bestow supreme and ordinary accomplishments!

chökü kha la nyingjé chu dzin trik
In the dharmakāya sky there gather clouds of compassion,
kalzang dro la wang zhi char gyün gyi
And the rain of the four empowerments showers down upon fortunate beings—
ku zhi pal ter tsa gyü lama la
To the root and lineage masters who bestow the splendour of the four kāyas,
solwa depso chok tün ngödrup tsol
I pray: please bestow supreme and ordinary accomplishments!

dé tar solwa tabpé tu nü kyi
Through the power and strength of this prayer of mine,
tsé di mi tün güpa kun zé né
May all unfavourable circumstances and setbacks fade away,
sa lam yönten yar ngö da zhin pel
May the qualities of the paths and stages increase like the waxing moon,
dak zhen dön nyi lhundrup dré min shok
And may my own and others’ welfare spontaneously come to fruition!

Jigme Trinlé Özer wrote this at the request of the diligent practitioner Norbu Zangpo and Chönyön.

| Translated by Adam Pearcey, 2018.

Source: rdo grub chen 01 ʼjigs med ʼphrin las ʼod zer. "mkha' 'gro'i gsol 'debs bsdus pa" in
gsung ʼbum ʼjigs med phrin las ʼod zer. 10 vols. [Khren tuʼu]: [bla ma bsod dar], 2014. Vol.
2: 500–501

Version: 1.2-20220322