Clarifying the Self-Initiation
An Empowerment of the Great Compassionate One, the Natural Liberation of Suffering
by Jigme Lingpa

Homage to the compassionate Noble One!
Here is presented the ritual for granting empowerment and entering into the maṇḍala of Avalokiteśvara,
Natural Liberation of Suffering. There are three parts.
I. The Preliminaries
Arrange a maṇḍala that includes a lotus with four petals, perfect doors and nine signs for the
deities, each on their respective places. Also arrange a vase, the secret substances, the
empowerment card of the consort, a mirror and a crystal, the torma and the regular offerings.
II. The Main Part
Carry out the practice of the maṇḍala, make offerings and recite the mantra as much as you can.
Focus on the victorious vase and recite the root mantra combined with the vowels and consonants,
and then focus on the activity vase while reciting the activity mantra of Hayagrīva.
The Self-Initiation
Perform the cleansing ritual and expel the obstructive forces. Hold the flower with:
a kham wira
aḥ khaṃ vīra
Put on the blindfold with:
The request:
künkhyen yeshe pungpo chan
Omniscient one, embodiment of primordial wisdom,1
sipé khorlo nam jongwe
Who thoroughly purifies the wheel of existence—
dering shepé rinchen ter
Lord, with your kindness, grant me this precious treasure
tsowö dak la kadrin tsol
Of which you have spoken today.2
Three times.
Recite the following verses of regular confession three times:
ho, dorjé lobpön sangye pal
Hoḥ. I prostrate to the vajra master,
dü sum zhuk la chaktsal lo
Glorious embodiment of the buddhas of past, present and future!
chok sum tenpé zhing gyur la
With a mind free from all duality,
nyimé yi kyi kyab su chi
I take refuge in the Three Jewels, the objects of reliance!
ngöjor yi kyi namtrulpé
I request that you accept these pure offerings,
dakpé chöpa zhé su sol
Both actual and envisioned.
ngödrub chuwo chöpé gek
My faults, the hindrances that cut the flow of accomplishments,3
nyejé malü shakpar gyi
I confess without exception.
chok chu khor sum dakpé chö
In all those actions throughout the ten directions done without attachment
ma chak chö la jéyirang
And free from concepts of subject, object and action, I rejoice!
dakpé ta zhi drima mé
I awaken the perfect mind set upon awakening,
dzokpé changchub semkyé do
Pure and untainted by the four extremes.
deshek wangchuk semchen la
To the bliss-gone ones,4 mighty lords and sentient beings.
göpa sum chir lü bul lo
I offer my body for the threefold purpose.
tserab drangpé lé nam kün
Gathering the merits accumulated throughout all my lives,
dü té changchub chenpor ngo
I dedicate them to supreme enlightenment!
Recite this three times.
Taking the vows:
tukjé chenpo kyab kyi chok tu dzin
I take the Great Compassionate One as my supreme source of refuge.
drowé döndu mönjuk semkyé ching
For the benefit of beings, I generate the bodhicitta of aspiration and action.
ku sung tuk dang nyamjor sang ngak kyi
I will always maintain the samaya vows of the Secret Mantra Vehicle:
damtsik dompa taktu kyepar gyi
Those of the enlightened body, speech, mind and union.
Three times.
samaya prabeshaya hung
samaya praveśaya hūṃ
Consider that the four doors of the maṇḍala suddenly open. With great compassion, pay homage
in stages to the enlightened body, speech and mind with:
om nama té hung
oṃ nama te hūṃ
om nama mé hung
oṃ nama me hūṃ
om nama nama hung
oṃ namo nama hūṃ
Recite this four times. Then:
kyilkhor gyi shar go wang tek pema dab gyé la khöpé
The main deity is placed near the eastern door of the maṇḍala upon an empowerment platform with
an eight-petalled lotus.
tsowö tukka né özer jung nammin gyi lü ten jang
From his heart arise rays of light that purify your body of karmic ripening.
nampar shepa hrih yikkar por gyurpa zhal né drang kü yib gyü
Your consciousness transforms into a white syllable hrīḥ. Flowing through the shape of your
body it exits through your mouth
dün gyi drolmé kha sang du bab detong lé kyepé sé kyi nampar gyurpa ngar gyi den la khö
And enters the secret space of Tārā, residing in front of you. You are born from bliss and emptiness
as her son and return to your seat.
denyi tukjé chenpor salwé né sum du yikdru sum gyi tsenpa lé özer tröpé chok chü dezhin shekpa
sé dang chepa chendrang timpé go sum dorjé sum du gyurpar gyur
Clearly appearing as the Great Compassionate One, your three centres are marked by the three
syllables. From them light radiates in the ten directions, inviting the tathāgatas and their
heirs. Consider that they dissolve into you, transforming your body, speech and mind into
the three vajras.
Perform the descent of blessings by joining the root mantra with praveśāya pheṃ pheṃ and reciting
them together. Offer a flower with:
pratitsa benza ho
pratīccha vajra hoḥ
Imagine that the superior deity on your head dissolves into you:
prati ghrihana imam sato maha bala
prati gṛhaṇa imam satva mahābala
ho, deshek nyingpo tsok gyé kyi
Hoḥ. My buddha nature is obscured by the eight consciousnesses
dongwé marik lingtok ni
And blinded by the cataract of ignorance.
yeshe turmé sal né kyang
Remove them with the scalpel of wisdom
namtar go sum ten du sol
And reveal the three doors of liberation!
jnana tsakshu prabeshaya pé
jñāna cakṣu praveśaya phaṭ
Recite this and consider that you see the truth of reality.
Granting the Empowerments
i. Vase Empowerment
Consider that from the heart of the main deity the empowerment substances gradually emanate.
hung, tashi bumpa lhé zhalyé
Hūṃ. In the divine palace of the auspicious vase
lha dang nyimé dütsi chü
Is the amṛta water indivisible from the deities,
kalden bu la wangkurwé
Through which you, fortunate child, are empowered.
nang zhen lha kü chakgyar dzog
May clinging to appearances be perfected as the mudrā of the deities' form,
nammin rigdzin nyertob ching
So that you attain the level of a matured vidyādhara
küntu ö kyi sa nön shog
And reach the stage of Universal Radiance.
Recite the root mantra combined with:
kaya abhikintsa mum
kayābhiṣiñca muṃ
dé lü dang tsé dribpa dak
With this, the body and obscurations of the channels are purified.
ku dorjé jinlab zhuk
The blessing of the vajra-body has entered you
bumpé wang tob
And you received the vase empowerment.
kyerim gyi nö du gyur
You have become a suitable vessel for generation phase practice.
nammin rikdzin gyi sabön teb
The seed of the matured vidyādhara has been planted within you.
tulkü gopang tobpé kal gyü la zhak ga
You have gained the fortune to realize the nirmāṇakāya.
ii. Secret Empowerment
Present the secret substances.
hung, yabyum jorwé changchub sem
Hūṃ. Red and white bodhicitta flows from the point of union
kar mar bhendé nang du kyil
Of the male deity and consort, and fills the skull-cup.
kalden bu la wangkurwé
With it, fortunate child, you are empowered.
tsa kham yigé nampardak
May your channels and elements be matured into syllables,
tsé la wangwé rigdzin tob
So that you attain the level of a vidyādhara with power over life
pema chen gyi sa nön shog
And reach the stage of the Lotus of Non-Attachment.
Recite the root mantra combined with:
waka abhikintsa mum
vākābhiṣiñca muṃ
dé ngak gi lé dang lung gi dribpa dak
With this, karma of the speech and obscurations of the wind-energy are purified.
sung dorjé jinlab zhuk
The blessing of vajra-speech has entered you
sangwé wang tob
And you received the secret empowerment.
dejö kyi nö du gyur
You have become a suitable vessel for mantra recitation.
tsewang rigdzin gyi sabön teb
The seed of the vidyādhara with power over life is planted within you.
longchö dzokpé gopang gi kal gyü la zhak go
You have gained the fortune to realize the saṃbhogakāya.
iii. Knowledge-Wisdom Empowerment
While holding the empowerment card of the consort:
hung, chö nam kün gyi jungné ni
Hūṃ. The source of all phenomena
dewa chenpo sangwé yum
Is the secret mother-consort of great bliss.
rik kyi bu la jinpa yi
By presenting her to you, fortunate child,
ga zhi yeshe ngön du gyur
May you actualize the wisdom of the four joys,
chakgya chenpö rigdzin tob
So that you attain the level of a mahāmudrā vidyādhara
khorlo tsokchen sa nön shog
And reach the stage of Great Cloud Mass of Rotating Syllables!5
Recite the root mantra combined with:
tsitta abhikintsa mum
cittābhiṣiñca muṃ
dé yi kyi lé dang tiklé dribpa dak
With this, karma of the mind and obscurations of the essences are purified.
tuk dorjé jinlab zhuk
The blessing of vajra-mind has entered you
sherab yeshe kyi wang tob
And you received the insight-wisdom empowerment.
detong tsenda li nö du gyur
You have become a suitable vessel for the bliss-emptiness of caṇḍāli practice.
chakgyé rikdzin gyi sabön teb
The seed of the mahāmudrā vidyādhara is planted within you.
chökü gopang gi kalwa gyü la zhak go
You have gained the fortune to realize the dharmakāya.
iv. Fourth Empowerment
Give the symbolic indication with the mirror and the crystal.
ho, kadak melong tsangmé ngog
Hoḥ. On the surface of the clear mirror of primordial purity
lhündrub dang shel drimé sal
The stainless crystal of spontaneous presence is reflected.
datak dzokpé wangkurwé
Through this empowerment in which symbolic indications are complete,
drimé rigpé neluk tog
May you realize the natural state of immaculate awareness,
lhündrub rigdzin nyertob né
So that you attain the level of a spontaneously accomplished vidyādhara
dewa chenpö sa nön shog
And reach the stage of great bliss.
Recite the root mantra combined with:
dharmadhatu abhikintsa mum
dharmadhātu-abhiṣiñca muṃ
dé künzhi lé dang shejé dribpa jang
With this, karma of the all-ground and cognitive obscurations are purified.
yeshe dorjé jinlab zhuk
The blessing of vajra-wisdom has entered you
tsik gi tsönpé döndam gyi wang tob
And you have received the absolute empowerment that is illustrated with words.
kadak dzogpachenpö nö du gyur
You have become a suitable vessel for the primordial purity of the Great Perfection.
lhündrub rigdzin gyi sabön teb
The seed of the spontaneously accomplished vidyādhara is planted within you.
tartuk gi drebu ngowo nyi kü gopang gi kalpa gyü la zhak go
You have gained the fortune to realize ultimate fruition of the svabhāvikakāya.
III. The Concluding Stages
Pledge to maintain the samayas:
tsawa ku sung tuk chok dang
All the supreme root samayas of body, speech and mind,
yenlak damtsik nyishu nga
The twenty-five branch samayas,
mé dang chikpu chalwa sog
And the Great Perfection samayas such as absence, oneness, and suffusion,
choga zhindu sungwar gyi
I pledge to maintain in the proper way.
Three times.
Offer a maṇḍala out of gratitude.
tsowö jitar ka tsalpa
Whatever the guru, chief of the maṇḍala, commands,
dedak tamché dak gi gyi
I shall carry out—each and every instruction.
khyé la dak kyang yongsu bul
I offer myself to you completely.
lobmar zung né ché du sol
Please take me as your disciple and make use of me.
Recite prayers of dedication and aspiration in the usual way,
And also recite the other concluding rituals as they are normally done.

Written at Chakzam Labrang at the request of Rinchen Dorje.

| Translated by Han Kop for the Longchen Nyingtik Project, 2022.

Source: 'Jigs med gling pa. "thugs rje chen po sdug bsngal rang grol las/ dbang don bdag 'jug
gsal ba" In 'jigs med gling pa mkhyen brtse 'od zer (et al). klong chen snying thig rtsa
pod. 5 Vols. Bodhnath, Kathmandu and Bodhgaya, Bihar: Shechen Publications, 1994 (BDRC W1KG13585).
Vol. 2: 383–387.

Version: 1.0-20220321
↑ Literally, ‘possessing the aggregates of primordial wisdom’.↑ This verse seems to be from
the tantra The Beginning Chapter of the Supremely Great Vajra (rdo rje dpal mchog chen po
brtag pa dang po, Toh 453).↑ Skt. siddhi.↑ Skt. sugata.↑ I.e., the thirteenth of the sixteen
stages according to the Nyingma system of inner tantras. See https://www.rigpawiki.org/index.php?title=Sixteen_bhumis