Consecrating the Vase for the Practice of the Great Compassionate One, Natural Liberation of
Suffering
compiled by the Fourth Dodrupchen Rinpoche, Tupten Trinlé Pal Zangpo

Purify with the mantra:
om sobhava shuddha sarva dharma sobhava shuddho hang
oṃ svabhāva śuddhāḥ sarvadharmāḥ svabhāva śuddho ‘haṃ
bumpa mimik tongpé ngang nyi lé
The vase has the nature of emptiness, beyond any conceptual reference.
tsennyi yongdzok zhalmé khang ü su
Within it is the palace of perfect qualities.
lhatsok kün sal tukké sabön lé
In its centre all the deities clearly appear and from the seed-syllables at their hearts
ö trö yeshepa nam chendrang gyur
Light radiates, inviting the wisdom deities.
benza samaya dza
vajra-samāja jaḥ
dza hung bam ho
jaḥ hūṃ baṃ hoḥ
Make offerings with:
om benza argham padam pupé dhupé aloké gendhé nevidé shapta ah hung
oṃ vajra-arghaṃ pādyaṃ puṣpe dhūpe āloke gandhe naivedye śabda āḥ hūṃ
Offer praise with:
töpar öpa tamché la
To all those worthy of praise
zhing dul kün gyi drang nyé kyi
I bow down with as many bodies
lü tüpa yi namkün tu
As there are atoms in the universe.
chok tu depé chaktsal tö
With steadfast faith, I pay homage!
Hold the dhāraṇī cord and say:
rang sok ngak kyi özer zung tak la
From the life-force mantra at your heart light rays radiate,
tril té bumpé lhatsok tukgyü kul
Flow through the dhāraṇī cord and invoke the wisdom minds of the deities in the vase.
dedak ku lejang sem dütsi gyün
From their bodies a stream of bodhicitta-amṛta
babpé bum chur nyimé ro chik gyur
Descends and becomes of one taste, beyond any duality, with the water of the vase.
om mani padmé hung hrih
oṃ maṇi padme hūṃ hrīḥ
Recite this as many times as appropriate. Then recite the maṇi mantra with the vowels and consonants
appended.
For the sand and mustard seeds:1
dak gi tukka né özer trö
From my heart radiate rays of light,
bumpé lha nam kyi tukdam gyi gyü kul
Invoking the sacred pledges of the deities of the vase.
dak dang lha nam lé özer trö
From myself and the deities radiate lights rays,
rik druk gi né dang bardo gang na nepé tsedé name of deceased
Touching the body of the object of my focus, the deceased called name of the deceased, whether
they remain in the realms of the six classes or in the intermediate state,
mikyul dé lü la pokpé lü ngak yi sum gyi lé dang nyönmongpé dikdrib dukngal tamché sang kyi
dak ching jang né nampar shepa gyang kyi lhé kyilkhor dir chung né lü sem la dewa khyepar
chen kyepar yangyang gom zhing
And cleansing and purifying all their negative actions, obscurations, suffering, physical, vocal
and mental karmas and their negative emotions. Their consciousness enters the divine
maṇḍala here and a special bliss arises in their body and mind. Meditate on this again and
again.
om mani padmé hung hrih
oṃ maṇi padme hūṃ hrīḥ
And recite the hundred-syllable mantra:
om benzasato samaya…
oṃ vajrasattva samayam…
The mantra of Sarvavit-Vairochana that purifies the lower realms:
om namo bhagavaté sarva durgaté pari shodhani radza ya, tathagataya, arhaté samyaksam budhaya,
teyata, om shodhané shodhané, sarva papam bishodhané, shudhé bishudhé, sarva karma abarana
bishudhé soha
oṃ namo bhagavate sarva-durgate pariśodhani-rājāya | tathāgatāya | arhate samyak-saṃbuddhāya
| tad yathā | oṃ śodhane śodhane | sarva pāpaṃ viśodhane | śuddhe viśuddhe | sarva-karma-avaraṇa
viśodhane svāhā
The dhāraṇī of the protector Akṣobhya:
namo ratna trayaya, namo bhagavaté, benza sara pramardhané, tathagataya, arhaté samyak sambuddhaya,
teyata, om benzé benzé maha benzé, maha tedzo benzé, maha vidya benzé, maha bodhitsita
benzé, maha bodhi mantopa samkramana benzé, sarva karma avarana vishva dhana benzé soha
namo ratna-trayāya | namo bhagavate | vajra-sāra-pramardane | tathāgatāya arhate samyak-saṃbhuddhāya
| tad yathā | oṃ vajre vajre mahāvajre | mahā-teja-vajre | mahā-vidyā-vajre | mahā-bodhicitta-vajre
mahā-bodhi-maṇḍopa-saṃkramaṇa-vajre | sarva-karm-āvaraṇa-viśodhana-vajre
svāhā
Then:
mikyul gyi am
All the physical, vocal and mental karma, negative actions and obscurations
tsedé kyi lü ngak yi sum gyi lé ngen dikdrib tamché shanting kuru yé soha
Of the object of your focus, the deceased called name of deceased—śāntiṅ-kuruye svāhā.
Recite the mantra as much as you can and then blow [via your hand on the substances]. While
focusing on the activity vase:
lé bum du trogyal tamdrin kudok marpo yé yukto dang
In the activity vase the King of Wrath Hayagrīva instantly appears. His body is red in colour,
in his right hand he holds a club,
yön dikdzub dzepa kechik gi salwé tukké özer trodü dön nyi dzé
And his left hand is in the threatening mudrā. From his heart rays of light radiate and re-converge,
enacting the twofold benefit.
ku yi cha tamché né dakjé dütsi gyün babpé bumpa gangwar gyur
From his entire body flows a stream of purifying amṛta that fills the vase.
om benza krodha hayagriva hung pé
oṃ vajra-krodha-hayagrīva hūṃ phaṭ
Recite this as many times as appropriate. Then make offerings, either elaborate or brief, and
recite the praise from the activity manual. Then:
hrih, gyalwa kün gyi chöku pemé dung
Hrīḥ. Dharmakāya of all the victorious ones, progeny of the Lotus Family,
chöjé öpakmépa dorjé chö
Lord of Dharma Amitābha—Buddha of Boundless Light, Vajradharma,
chenrezik wang hri lé ngampé ku
Lord Avalokiteśvara, your form arising majestically from hrīḥ,
tamdrin také zhé la chaktsal tö
And Hayagrīva, making neighing sounds, to you I pay homage!
Make confessions with the hundred-syllable mantra:
om benza sato samaya…
oṃ vajrasattva samayam…
Then they melt into light:
om ah hung, zhé dungchö kyi chu chöyön du pulwé lha nam detong chenpö ngowor zhuwa bum chu dang
yermé du gyur
With oṃ āḥ hūṃ the water of the conch is presented as an offering, causing the deities to melt
into the essence of great empty bliss, becoming indivisible with the water of the vase.
And:
lé bum gyi lha ö du zhuwa lé trowö dul tra rabtu gyur
The deities of the activity vase melt into light and emanate infinitely small wrathful deities.
Tossing the flower of awareness:2
om benza samaya om, a benza samaya ah, hung benza samaya hung, so benza samaya so, ha benza
samaya ha
oṃ vajrasamaya oṃ | āḥ vajrasamaya āḥ | hūṃ vajrasamaya hūṃ | svā vajrasamaya svā | hā vajrasamaya
hā
Invoking the accomplishments and the dissolution:
om, yeshe gyalpo ku sung tuk
Oṃ. King of Wisdom with your wondrous enlightened body,
yönten trinlé mepo ché
Speech, mind, qualities and activity—
denyi du ni nyamjor bé
With all of those in union,
chakgya chenpor dak jor chik
Bring me to the state of mahāmudrā!
om benza samaya hung, om benza samaya stom,  om benza samaya ho
oṃ vajrasamaya hūṃ | oṃ vajrasamaya sthaṃ | oṃ vajrasamaya hoḥ
Request permission for the student to enter the maṇḍala:
om, dorjé yeshe tob jepé
Oṃ. Please grant your permission for this student of mine
dezhin shekpa tamché kyi
To enter this great maṇḍala
nyingpö kyilkhor chenpo dir
Of the heart of all the thus-gone ones,
dak gi lobma jukpar tsal
Who are the source of primordial vajra wisdom.
dza hung bam ho, om benza sato samaya
jaḥ hūṃ baṃ hoḥ | oṃ vajrasattva samayam…
Recite the hundred-syllable mantra.
om ah hung, palden tsawé lama rinpoche
Oṃ āḥ hūṃ. Glorious root guru, precious one,
dak gi chiwor pemé den zhuk la
Dwell on the lotus-seat in the depth of my heart,
kadrin chenpö goné jezung té
Look upon me with the grace of your great compassion,
ku sung tuk kyi wang chok kur du sol
Grant me the supreme empowerments of body, speech and mind!

| Translated by Han Kop, 2022, for the Longchen Nyingtik Project, based on a teaching given
by Khenchen Pema Sherab in France, 2022.

Source: 'Jigs med gling pa. "thugs rje chen po sdug bsngal rang grol gyi bum sgrub", in klong
snying gsang sgrub thugs rje chen po sdug bsngal rang grol 'don chog skor. (BDRC W2KG210385).
Gangtok, Sikkim: mchod rten dgon pa, 2016. 67-72.

Version: 1.0-20220616
↑ Khenchen Pema Sherab comments that the sand is to purify the negativity of the lower realms
and the mustard seeds are to expel the negative forces.↑ Khenpo Pema Sherab Rinpoche explains
that tossing the flower is a form of receiving empowerment, whereby you realize that
your own awareness and the generated deities are one in essence.